# Behavioral Economics applied on Environmental Issues

## Introduction
Behavioural cconomics, a subfield of the discipline of economics will be discussed in this canon. This field gained importance over the last decades, because it provides insights into the way people make decisions about their actions. Since individuals do not always act according to theoretical models behavioural economics is aimed at bridging this gap between theory and reality, leading to more realistic predictions. Two tools used in behavioural economics are dealt with in detail: game theory and utility theory. These theories can be used to answer societal questions. This is demonstrated with examples in the context of environmental matters; the tragedy of commons.

## Definition of key concepts 
In the following key concepts and terms are explained in order to provide a basic background knowledge of economics required to understand what behavioral economics is about. 

### Economics - Microeconomics
Economics is a social science concerned with the factors that determine the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services. Economics is focussed on behavior and the interaction of people (economic agents) as well as how economies as a whole work. Generally economics is divided into macro- and microeconomics. Macroeconomics focuses on economies as a whole while microeconomics focuses more on individual actions of for example individuals, households, or firms. One important assumption in economics is that of rationality. Rational choice theory assumes that people are self-interested, have stable preferences, engage in maximizing behavior and take all possible option into account. 

### Utility theory
In economics, utility theory is used to explain the choices individuals make. Utility theory implies that individuals value a good or service based on the satisfaction they derive from it.  It is not always possible to exactly measure utility from all possible outcomes, but individuals are capable of ranking them from best to worst. This implies that individuals have a complete overview of all possible options. They are able to indicate which good or service they prefer over others, but with regards to the same good or service it holds that more is always better. With regards to the complete set of goods and services they consume, people prefer to have variety: mix is always better. Again, rationality is an important assumption in utility theory. This tool can be used in Behavioral economics. 

### Game theory
Game theory analyses multi-person decision problems, which are called games. A game is a situation in which at least two individuals who have at least partially diverging interests interact with one another. Here, the payoff of one player does not only depend on the player´s own actions but also on the other player´s actions. The task of game theory is to model and to solve such games. To solve a game means to determine how a rational player would act in it.
The most famous application of game theory is the prisoner's dilemma. Two (or more) rational individuals might not cooperate, even though it would be best for both of them to do so. This dilemma can be explained best with an example: imagine two members being arrested and imprisoned. There is not sufficient evidence, so both members need to be questioned but they are not able to speak with each other. Each member can either confess or remain silent. If both members remain silent they are imprisoned for 1 year and if both confess they are imprisoned for 2 years. However, if only one confesses and the other remains silent, the one who confesses is set free while the other is imprisoned for 3 years. Regardless of what the other person does, it is always better to confess. Rational game theory would therefore predict an outcome that is not best for everybody. 

### Behavioral economics 
Behavioral economics studies the effects of psychological, social, cognitive, and emotional factors on the economic decisions of individuals and institutions. The consequences of these decisions, on for example market prices, are also of interest. Behavioral economics is primarily concerned with the bounds of rationality of economic agents. Behavioral economic has gained importance over the last decades, because it provides insights into the way people make decisions. People do not act rational, but as human beings guided by intuitions and emotions. Nowadays, behavioral economics plays an important role in informing policy makers about the consequences of certain policies.

## Behavioral economics and environmental issues 
The insights of behavioral economics can be used to describe problems occurring in environmental context caused by human beings. Moreover, it can help to explain why theses problems arise and provide possible solutions to them. This can be used as a source of information for policy makers facing decisions affecting the environment.

### Tragedy of the commons
Since behavioral economics can attribute to insights in environmental policy issues, the following section will give an example to the tragedy of the commons, which is a application of the prisoners dilemma. The tragedy of the commons came into discussion, because of the article written by Garrett Hardin in 1968, and since then has been used as a framework for societal problems.

The tragedy of the commons can best be explained by a simple example, given by Hardin in his article: Image a large pasture that is open to everyone. Every herdsman will of course try to get as many cattle as possible on the pasture, because he wants to maximize his own gain. More cattle, means more revenue, so more gain. Before adding more cattle to the pasture, the herdsman can ask himself the question what the extra utility of one more animal on the pasture is. The answer is two-sided. On the one hand, there is some extra utility: more sales from the additional animal. However, on the other hand, there is also a reduction of utility. This reduction is a consequence of overgrazing that can be created when adding an additional animal. Too many animals grazing means that the grass cannot grow fast enough to recover. Since all the herdsman share the reduction in utility, this will never be larger than the gain in utility by adding another cattle. Therefore, every herdsman will increase the number of animals until the whole pasture is overgrazed and not useful for any of the herdsman. The tragedy over here is that pursuing your own interest will ruin it all. Therefore, freedom in the commons does not work. This example shows that if people act rational, this does not lead always to the overall maximization of utility: Here the land is not used in the most efficient way. The occurring tragedy is that people acting rational according to standard economic theory would destroy the environment. 

Other examples of the tragedy of the commons are: overfishing in the ocean, depletion of oil and gas reservoirs, and pollution by different agents. A very important example of the tragedy of the commons will be more explained in the next section: Climate Change. After this section, some solutions of the tragedy of the commons will be mentioned. 

### Application example for the tragedy of the commons: climate change 
In the following, an example is given how the tragedy of the commons can be applied in a real live context: the case of global warming. A closer look reveals that states do not act according to the predictions of the model. So in a classical game theoretical sense they do not act rational. Therefore, to explain this other concepts are needed. Behavioural game theory would be suited for that.
 
Global warming or climate change is an international environmental problem. Mainly global warming is caused by the emission of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Greenhouse gases are produced by the use of fossil fuels, deforestation and farming and agriculture. The consequences of climate change are the melting of the polar ice shields and a rise of the sea level. In some regions extreme weather events and rainfall are becoming more common while others are experiencing more extreme heat waves and droughts. These changes also affect the living and surviving situations of humans and animals.
 
The issue of climate change can be modelled with the help of game theory, in particular by the tragedy of the commons model which is, as mentioned above, a classical prisoner’s dilemma situation: every state of the world would be better of if global warming would be addressed by collective action. At the same time, every state would prefer if all the other states would act while itself stays apart from doing anything. Because the reduction of greenhouse gasses bears costs for a state since including restrictions for industries which are important contributors to the welfare of a state. So the rational choice would be not to cooperate.

However, it can be observed that international cooperation takes place: In order to address the problem of global warming with collective action of states the Kyoto protocol was set up. The Kyoto Protocol is an international treaty, which extends the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change that commits states to reduce greenhouse gas emission.

While the cooperation in this case cannot be explained with standard game theoretical models, and explanation with help of behavioural game theory is possible.
 
One possible explanation why states in that case act differently than the “tragedy of the commons” model predicts can be given by including the element of iteration. Even if it is rational for actors not to cooperate if they meet each other once, it can become a rational action for them if they meet more often and have the opportunity to respond to the actions of the others.

Moreover, the structure of the problem in itself provides an incentive to establish cooperation, because everyone would be harmed the most by collective inaction. Collective inaction would lead to severe economic and ecologic harm in the long run which is far higher than the benefit in the short term. Everyone would be better of if a process can be set up (like the Kyoto Protocol) that guarantees mutual cooperation. Furthermore, while the standard economic agent purely is aimed at maximizing his own utility, in the case of slowing down climate warming the effect will be on future generations and thus is not in the self-interest of an actor today.
 
### Solutions to the tragedy of the commons
In the previous example, one of the solutions to the tragedy of the commons was given: a binding contract. Moreover, there other possible solutions would be property rights, taxation and regulation and referencing. 

Property rights assign property to an individual and therefore change a common to a privat. Thus, the individual owning the private does not an incentive to overexploit his property. However, this solution is not applicable for all commons. For example fresh air can not be a private, because use of it can not be limited by property rights. 

Taxation and regulation provides the possibility to make non-cooperation more expensive for the individual. For example a tax can be placed on the emission of greenhouse gasses. 

Referencing compares individual behavior with average social behavior. Through this social norms can affect individual behavior, because it is generally not favorable for an individual to deviate with his actions from what is socially accepted. For example, individual energy consumption can be decreased by showing the energy use of an individual in comparison to its neighbors.  

## Conclusion 
The aim of this canon was to give an insight into behavioral economics. It was described where behavioral economics can be placed in the disciple of cconomics. Furthermore, some general terms were clarified which are necessary background knowledge for understanding the content of this canon. Second, an example was given of a basic economic situation, the tragedy of the commons, lined out in the context of an environmental issue. It was shown how standard economic theory fails to explain the actions of individuals and lined out how these actions could be explained while using behavioral economics. This stressed the importance of behavioral economics

## Interesting articles to read
* Brown, G. and Hagen, D.A. (2010) [Behavioural Economics and the Environment](http://search.proquest.com/openview/ad1dcbc41c85d8f954a429bc4ca82d5b/1?pq-origsite=gscholar) *Environment and Resource Economics* 46: 139-146.
* DeSombre, E.R. (2004) [Global Warming: More Common Than Tragic](http://web.mit.edu/sabrevln/Public/GameTheory/Ethics%20&%20International%20Affairs/Global%20Warming%20More%20Common%20than%20Tragic.pdf) *Ethics & International Affairs* 18(01), 41-46.
* Hardin, G. (1968) [The tragedy of the commons Science](http://www.geo.mtu.edu/~asmayer/rural_sustain/governance/Hardin%201968.pdf)
* Libecap, G.D. (2009). [The tragedy of the commons: property rights and markets as solutions to resource and environmental problems](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8489.2007.00425.x/full) *Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics*, 53(1), 129-144.
* OECD (2012) [Behavioural economics and environmental policy design](https://www.oecd.org/env/consumption-innovation/Behavioural%20Economics%20and%20Environmental%20Policy%20Design.pdf)
* Shogren, J.F. and Taylor, L.O. (2008) [On Behavioural-Environmental Economics](http://reep.oxfordjournals.org/content/2/1/26.full.pdf+html) *Review of Environmental Economics and Policy* 2(1): 26-44
